#### SER594: Project Proposal
#### Crime rate prediction from news tweets
#### Hariraj Venkatesan
#### 9/24/2022

Keywords: Crime analysis, Forecasting, Regression

Description: Crime is one of the biggest dangers to a peaceful society and is a serious obstacle to harmonious living. Accurate crime forecasting will aid law enforcement authorities in formulating plans to increase public safety. It has been difficult for the scientific community to create precise prediction tools for this purpose since the crime rate depends on several variables. This project seeks to forecast crime rates by utilizing the vast volumes of data present in the mammoth social media platform Twitter. The approach involves using tweets from reliable news organizations to predict the trend of crime rates in the future based on instances from the past. Using this, we will be able to answer questions about the events that result in increased criminal activity and the efficacy of law enforcement measures in lowering crime rates. The training set will include all news tweets published by the news organization, including those on droughts, political rebellion against the ruling party, constructive measures like anti-drug campaigns and rehabilitation camps. The number of tweets about criminal incidents will be the target feature.

Intellectual Merit: The results derived from this project will be useful in determining the events that lead to increase in crime such as inflation, increase in drug abuse or political revolts. When a combination of crime-causing events occurs, we will be able to plan for proactive measures such as increasing police surveillance in vulnerable areas. The results from the model will also provide insight about the efficiency of the various initiatives conducted by law enforcement agencies such as providing medical counselling to socially oppressed people to prevent them from indulging in malicious activities. The insights will be useful in enhancing such programs and planning future initiatives that will be effective in preventing crimes such as robbery or shootouts.

Data Sourcing: The dataset for this project will be generated by scraping tweets posted by news agencies - CNN, The New York Times, Reuters and The Economist. We will scrap tweets posted over a period of 6 months from January 1 to June 30 of the year 2022. The data will be processed to extract the tweet text, created time, hashtags and metrics such as number of likes, comments and retweets.

Related Work: S. Tarlekar, R. Bhosle, E. D'souza and S. Sheikh, "Geographical Crime Rate Prediction System," 2021 IEEE India Council International Subsections Conference (INDISCON), 2021, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/INDISCON53343.2021.9582218.